meta RFC to adopt RFC (#1358)
projectriff/riff: RFCs/RFC-0: Lightweight RFC process.md

# RFC-0: Lightweight RFC Process for riff

**To be Reviewed By:** Nov 15th 2019

**Authors:** Swapnil Bawaskar

**Status:** **Active** | Accepted | Dropped | Superseded

**Superseded by:** N/A

**Related:** N/A

## Problem

> As the scope of the project expands and the number of moving pieces increase, we need a process to gather feedback on the changes proposed to the architecture and interaction of various components in the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the scope of the project expands and the number of moving pieces increases, we need a process to gather feedback on the changes proposed to the architecture and interaction of various components in the system.
```

This document will refer to that process as the “Request For Comments (RFC) process”.

## Solution
The proposed solution to address the problem described above is to have an individual author or a group of authors submit a proposal to the community in order to gather feedback and achieve consensus. The RFC follows the same format as used by this proposal.

> Much inspiration for this proposal has been drawn from [Apache Geode's RFC process](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/GEODE/Lightweight+RFC+Process), which inturn draws from Phil Calçado’s [Structured RFC Process](https://philcalcado.com/2018/11/19/a_structured_rfc_process.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Much inspiration for this proposal has been drawn from [Apache Geode's RFC process](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/GEODE/Lightweight+RFC+Process), which in turn draws from Phil Calçado’s [Structured RFC Process](https://philcalcado.com/2018/11/19/a_structured_rfc_process.html).
```

> All RFCs are submitted via PRs which will be merged when approved.

Reviewer: Probably worth saying which repo the PRs should be against.

Author: incorporated!

### Collaboration

> Comments and feedback should be provided on the PR and focus on the technical content.

Reviewer: As opposed to what?

Reviewer 2: Agreed, while I see why you put that sentence in, I feel this could be misinterpreted. Not all RFCs are about "technical content". And even when it is technical, it is not "only technical" (ie execution) but should also question other aspects beforehand (eg motivation)

Author: There was a sentence in the Geode RFC, about not to comment on grammar, language etc, that I had removed. 
All fixed now.

> Authors should address all comments written by the deadline. This doesn't mean every comment and suggestion must be accepted and incorporated, but they should be carefully read and responded to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Authors should address all comments by the deadline. This doesn't mean every comment and suggestion must be accepted and incorporated, but they should be carefully read and responded to.
```

> Every RFC has a life cycle with the following phases:

Reviewer 3: This implies that each RFC goes through each phase of a lifecycle, but in reality it's a state machine where some state transitions are mutually exclusive (e.g. accepted vs. dropped).

Author: changed to: `Every RFC is in one of the following phases`

> Every RFC has a lifecycle. The life cycle has the following phases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every RFC has a life cycle with the following phases:
```

> * **Active**: The RFC has been drafted and is open for comments. When making the PR, the doc should start out in this state.

Reviewer: Does a draft PR count as active? I'd hope not.

Author: Once a PR is open, people can comment on it, which would serve the purpose of the RFC. Hence Active.

Reviewer 4: Draft PRs are common for things that are still in development. I think Drafts should be encouraged for RFCs, as I did for rfc-0002. A draft is implicitly not ready for comments, and comments can be ignored until the rfc is ready for comments.

> * **Accepted**: All the comments have been addressed and the changes proposed on this RFC have been accepted. This should be the state while merging the PR.

Reviewer: "the changes proposed on this RFC is ambiguous. Does this refer to the changes proposed by the RFC or the changes to the RFC requested by comments?

If the former, which I'd hope, then:
```suggestion
* **Accepted**: All the comments have been addressed and the changes proposed by this RFC have been accepted. This should be the state while merging the PR.
```

Reviewer 2: why not use "on **that** RFC"?

Reviewer 3: I think the idea is to accept the changes requested on the PR for the RFC itself, whereas changes proposed _by_ the RFC would be the follow-up to an RFC reaching the *Accepted* state.

Author: yes. Accepted only means that the proposed changes have been agreed upon. The implementation should start at this point.

Author: I changed the language to:
`All the comments have been addressed and the proposed changes have been agreed upon. The implementation may start after this point. This should be the state while merging the PR.`

> * **Dropped**: The changes proposed on this RFC aren't in effect anymore, the document is kept for historical purposes and there is a new RFC that’s more current.

Reviewer: Should the PR be closed?

Reviewer 3: If replaced by a "more current" RFC, how is this different from Superseded? And why is Superseded not listed as a "phase"?

Author: Changed Dropped and added Superceded:
```
* **Dropped**: The changes proposed on this RFC were not agreed upon and no implementation will follow.
* **Superseded**: The changes proposed on this RFC aren't in effect anymore, the document may be kept for historical purposes and there is a new RFC that’s more current.
```

### Approval

> The proposal should be posted with a date by which the author would like to see the approval decision to be made. How much time is given to comment depends on the size and complexity of the proposed changes, but ideally should be from 2 days to a week.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The proposal should be posted with a date by which the author would like to have the approval decision. How much time is given to comment depends on the size and complexity of the proposed changes, but ideally should be from 2 days to a week.
```

Author: incorporated!

> The proposal should be posted with a date by which the author would like to see the approval decision to be made. How much time is given to comment depends on the size and complexity of the proposed changes, but ideally should be from 2 days to a week.

Reviewer: I think 2 days is much too short. Even if a RFC is small, we should allow enough time for people to review it. It can always be approve early if appropriate.

Reviewer 2: +1. Two days seems way too short. Having a deadline is good though, especially if we make a point in meetings to state which RFCs are currently open and need attention

Author: what would be a more acceptable timeline?

Author: removed timeline/deadline from proposal.

### When to write an RFC?

> There is always the option of going straight to a pull request. However, for larger changes, it might be wise to de-risk the risk of rejection of the pull request by first gathering input from the community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is always the option of going straight to a pull request. However, for larger changes, it is advisable to reduce the risk of rejection of the pull request by first gathering input from the community.
```

> It’s encouraged to write an RFC for any major change. A major change might be:

Reviewer 2: Should we also consider the case where there are "obviously several alternatives in design or implementation" as a trigger for RFC. Of course this too is pretty vague, but seems like a good reason to discuss. If this makes sense, should there be one RFC per option, or a single RFC for the "feature", discussing (at least while in the Active phase) all the options?

Author: I think this should be up to the RFC author to decide. FWIW, I described two approaches in this PR: https://github.com/projectriff/riff/pull/1359/files

Author: Please re-open if you strongly feel we need this.

> * Addition of any major new feature or subsystem

Reviewer 2: This seems like a tautologic sentence, defining major with the use of the word ... "major"

Author: fixed!

> * Changes that impact existing, or introduce new public APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Changes that impact existing, or introduce new, public APIs.
```

> * Changes that need to be coordinated across multiple repositories.

Reviewer 3: maybe add an item for changes that will introduce user-facing configuration or concepts (i.e. things to be named)

Author: incorporated!

### How to write an RFC?

> 1. Copy the RFC template (in same folder as this document) and write your proposal! It's up to the author's discretion to decide which section in the template make sense for their proposal. It's recommended to cover the problem the proposal is solving, who it affects, how you’re proposing to solve it, and answers to frequently asked questions. Explicitly listing the goals will also make it easier to retrospect later on the proposal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Copy the RFC template (in same folder as this document) and write your proposal! It's up to the author's discretion to decide which sections in the template make sense for their proposal. Cover the problem the proposal is solving, who it affects, how you’re proposing to solve it, and answers to frequently asked questions. Explicitly listing the goals will also make it easier to evaluate whether the proposal was successful.
```

> 2. Add your RFC to the riff/rfcs source directory, update to the next unique number. 

Reviewer: How should someone determine the next free RFC number? Suppose there are several RFC PRs in flight and some (recently) closed.

Author: I don't think there should be closed PRs. We should merge all RFC in either `Accepted` OR `Dropped` state, so numbering should be straight forward.

3. Post a PR for your RFC prefixing the title with `RFC-#`, where `#` is the number of your RFC. Make sure to state the deadline clearly in your PR. 
4. Answer questions and concerns on the PR. Consider adding questions that get asked more than once to the FAQ section of the RFC.

> 5. After the deadline for feedback has been reached summarize the consensus and your decision on the PR  thread. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. After the deadline for feedback has been reached summarize the consensus and your decision on the PR thread. 
```

    1. If the decision is to drop the proposal, the status should be updated to Dropped. 

>     2. If we are moving forward the status goes to *Active*

Reviewer: What's the status of the RFC prior to this?

Author: The status here should be Accepted. fixed.

>     3. When there is a newer RFC that replaces this one the status goes to *Superseded* and the *Superseded By* gets updated with the number of the new RFC.

Reviewer: Should the new RFC say that it supersedes an earlier PR?

Author: added Supersedes.

>     3. When there is a newer RFC that replaces this one the status goes to *Superseded* and the *Superseded By* gets updated with the number of the new RFC.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    3. When there is a newer RFC that replaces another the status goes to *Superseded* and the *Superseded By* gets updated with the number of the new RFC.
```

Author: these instructions talk about the RFC that you are working on. Hence `this`

### Humble Advice
Some things can be helpful to keep in mind when writing technical documents:

1. Keep the document brief but complete. People don’t have time to thoroughly read and think about extremely long documents and they’ll receive less feedback compared with a shorter document. If you find it challenging to meet this limit then maybe the proposal is too big and could be broken up.

> 2. Include evidence of the problem if at all possible, even if it’s anecdotal. This can help others see the core causes of the issue rather than only being able to comment on the diagnosis or solution. For example, consider linking to evidence inline, brief inline quotes, and/or footnotes.

Reviewer: "linking to evidence inline" is confusing. Is it a link or inline or what?

Author: fixed to say: `consider linking to evidence`

> 3. IETF RFCs you may see contain strict rules conveyed within the semantic meaning of *SHOULD*, *MUST*, and *MAY*. You don’t need to stress about the particulars of language or semantics when writing riff-RFCs. Place importance explaining your problem and proposal clearly, succinctly, and convincingly over the specifics of implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. IETF RFCs you may see contain strict rules conveyed within the semantic meaning of *SHOULD*, *MUST*, and *MAY*. You don’t need to stress about the particulars of language or semantics when writing riff-RFCs. Focus on explaining your problem and proposal clearly, succinctly, and convincingly rather than going into implementation detail.
```

> ### IEEE RFC Model as-is

Reviewer: Did you mean the following?
```suggestion
### IETF RFC Model as-is
```

Author: Yes, Thanks!

> Although any collaborative development process will have feedback as a core component, the name *RFC* was made popular by the process used by the IETF to document fundamental standards for what eventually became the Internet. We could follow the [IETF RFC model](http://www.livinginternet.com/i/ia_rfc.htm), and maybe even require authors to use terms like MUST, SHOULD, and MAY as formally specified by [RFC2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt) to avoid ambiguity. 

Reviewer: isn't the point that IETF RFCs are _standards_ whereas riff RFCs are design proposals?

Author: I am inclined to remove the entire `IEEE RFC Model as-is` section. would that be ok?

Author: I removed this section.

> # RFC-0: Lightweight RFC Process for riff

Reviewer 4: I have a personal preference for lowercase directories and filenames, but will follow the group consensus

Reviewer 2: +1 for lowercase filenames too, with dashes as separators when it makes sense

> **To be Reviewed By:** Nov 15th 2019

Reviewer 4: is three days typical? Is that too short?

Author: That would depend on the scope of the RFC. Ideally, we should have a community meeting every week where we can discuss any Active RFCs and then vote on approving them.

Author: removed timeline/deadline from proposal.

**Authors:** Swapnil Bawaskar

**Status:** **Active** | Accepted | Dropped | Superseded

**Superseded by:** N/A

**Related:** N/A

## Problem
As the scope of the project expands and the number of moving pieces increase, we need a process to gather feedback on the changes proposed to the architecture and interaction of various components in the system.

This document will refer to that process as the “Request For Comments (RFC) process”.

## Solution
The proposed solution to address the problem described above is to have an individual author or a group of authors submit a proposal to the community in order to gather feedback and achieve consensus. The RFC follows the same format as used by this proposal.

Much inspiration for this proposal has been drawn from [Apache Geode's RFC process](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/GEODE/Lightweight+RFC+Process), which inturn draws from Phil Calçado’s [Structured RFC Process](https://philcalcado.com/2018/11/19/a_structured_rfc_process.html).

> All RFCs are submitted via PRs which will be merged when approved.

Reviewer 4: who approves RFCs?

Author: I tried to make this clearer: https://github.com/projectriff/riff/pull/1358/commits/0320989d0370c4367ad56fe88715b8723203590a

### Collaboration
Comments and feedback should be provided on the PR and focus on the technical content.

> Authors must address all comments written by the deadline. This doesn't mean every comment and suggestion must be accepted and incorporated, but they must be carefully read and responded to.

Reviewer 4: "must" and "lightweight" often don't go together in my book

```suggestion
Authors should address all comments written by the deadline. This doesn't mean every comment and suggestion must be accepted and incorporated, but they should be carefully read and responded to.
```

Every RFC has a lifecycle. The life cycle has the following phases:
* **Active**: The RFC has been drafted and is open for comments. When making the PR, the doc should start out in this state.
* **Accepted**: All the comments have been addressed and the changes proposed on this RFC have been accepted. This should be the state while merging the PR.
* **Dropped**: The changes proposed on this RFC aren't in effect anymore, the document is kept for historical purposes and there is a new RFC that’s more current.

### Approval
The proposal should be posted with a date by which the author would like to see the approval decision to be made. How much time is given to comment depends on the size and complexity of the proposed changes, but ideally should be from 2 days to a week.

### When to write an RFC?

> There is always the option of going straight to a pull request. However, for larger changes, it might be wise to de-risk the risk of rejection of the pull request by first gathering input from the community.

Reviewer 4: When should an RFC be created vs an issue?

Author: added text to say "file an issue as the first step".

It’s encouraged to write an RFC for any major change. A major change might be:
* Addition of any major new feature or subsystem

> * Changes that impact existing, or introduce new public APIs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Changes that impact existing, or introduce new public APIs.
* Changes that need to be coordinated across multiple repositories.
```

### How to write an RFC?
1. Copy the RFC template (in same folder as this document) and write your proposal! It's up to the author's discretion to decide which section in the template make sense for their proposal. It's recommended to cover the problem the proposal is solving, who it affects, how you’re proposing to solve it, and answers to frequently asked questions. Explicitly listing the goals will also make it easier to retrospect later on the proposal.

> 2. Add your RFC to the geode/rfcs source directory, update to the next unique number. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Add your RFC to the riff/rfcs source directory, update to the next unique number. 
```

3. Post a PR for your RFC prefixing the title with `RFC-#`, where `#` is the number of your RFC. Make sure to state the deadline clearly in your PR. 
4. Answer questions and concerns on the PR. Consider adding questions that get asked more than once to the FAQ section of the RFC.
5. After the deadline for feedback has been reached summarize the consensus and your decision on the PR  thread. 
    1. If the decision is to drop the proposal, the status should be updated to Dropped. 
    2. If we are moving forward the status goes to *Active*
    3. When there is a newer RFC that replaces this one the status goes to *Superseded* and the *Superseded By* gets updated with the number of the new RFC.

> ### Immutability & Errata

Reviewer 4: immutability feels outdated. Git provides strong version history and a decent change log (if people write good commit messages). The industry trend has been towards living standards that reflect the current state.

Author: good point. Since our RFCs are in version control, I will remove this.

Once approved the existing body of the RFC should remain immutable. 

Once the proposed work starts, we likely will learn things that require minor changes to the RFC to keep it current. These changes should be captured in an *Errata* section at the end of the document rather than modifying the existing body of the  document directly. This is to highlight how the approach has changed, since initial discussion.

### Humble Advice
Some things can be helpful to keep in mind when writing technical documents:

1. Keep the document brief but complete. People don’t have time to thoroughly read and think about extremely long documents and they’ll receive less feedback compared with a shorter document. If you find it challenging to meet this limit then maybe the proposal is too big and could be broken up.
2. Include evidence of the problem if at all possible, even if it’s anecdotal. This can help others see the core causes of the issue rather than only being able to comment on the diagnosis or solution. For example, consider linking to evidence inline, brief inline quotes, and/or footnotes.

> 3. IETF RFCs you may see contain strict rules conveyed within the semantic meaning of *SHOULD*, *MUST*, and *MAY*. You don’t need to stress about the particulars of language or semantics when writing Geode-RFCs. Place importance explaining your problem and proposal clearly, succinctly, and convincingly over the specifics of implementation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. IETF RFCs you may see contain strict rules conveyed within the semantic meaning of *SHOULD*, *MUST*, and *MAY*. You don’t need to stress about the particulars of language or semantics when writing riff-RFCs. Place importance explaining your problem and proposal clearly, succinctly, and convincingly over the specifics of implementation.
```

> ## Prior Art

Reviewer 4: I'd nix this section. We haven't taken the time to evaluate other processes, and critiquing them feels out of scope.

Author: removed. We can add back if desired.
